The operating system, as an interface for virtualizing various hardware resources like CPU cycles, memory, persistent storage, etc. given to user programs, must limit what user programs are permitted to do in order to maintain security and enforce process isolation. Linux and most other operating systems do this by providing multiple privilege modes in which processes may run. Typically, OSes employ a user-mode and kernel/supervisor-mode. These permissions determine which instructions may be executed, [[Memory Virtualization|how addresses are translated]], and what memory locations may be accessed. For instance, user-mode processes must not be able to manipulate the memory of other processes, whereas a kernel-mode process should be able to do so.
## Traps
Traps are a means by which CPU execution is passed from a user program to the OS, something that is necessary for CPU scheduling and other privileged operations abstracted from user programs.
### System Calls
User processes may wish to perform an action that they would not be allowed to do unsupervised, such as reading from a directory. Since it would be incredibly limiting to not permit the user to perform such actions, the OS allows user processes to access such functionality by performing a trap via a system call. System calls generate a trap, transferring control to the operating system whilst providing the OS with some information related to what it wishes the OS to perform. The OS then does as it sees fit depending on what the user requested, and ultimately hands control back to the user when it is done.
### Exceptions
Another way user processes might transfer control to the OS is by performing an illegal operation such as dividing by zero, which automatically generates a trap. The OS then decides how to resolve the exception, often terminating the offending process.
### Interrupts
Interrupts are asynchronous events that allow control to be transferred to the operating system without any form of yielding by the currently running process. For instance, the completion of an asynchronous I/O operation often leads to an interrupt so that the OS may decide what to do with the results of the I/O.
#### Process Scheduling
A special case of interrupt-generated traps is from a hardware clock. The majority of modern operating systems including Windows and Linux employ pre-emptive scheduling, meaning that allocation of CPU resources is performed by the operating system rather than being shared voluntarily by user processes. In pre-emptive scheduling, a physical hardware clock is used to generate traps at regular intervals, so that the operating system may periodically take control to determine which available user process should run next for a time. 