The x86 architecture [[Memory Virtualization|maps virtual to physical addresses]] via a multi-level paging system similar to the multi-level index systems in some filesystems. Specifically, x86 employs a 4-level page table, consisting of L1, L2, L3, and L4 tables. Each page table takes up one page and contains an array of page table entries (PTEs) each containing some permission metadata and a pointer which can either point to a place in memory or on disk (known as swap space). 

The PTEs within L1 contain an address pointing to an L2 page table, whose PTEs in turn point to L3 page tables. Finally, L4 page tables contain PTEs directly pointing to the data itself. To keep track of where these page tables are, x86 CPUs contain a register called CR3 which points to the address in memory of the L1 page table, and the register will be stored per-process by the operating system.

When x86 translates a virtual address to a physical one, it starts by ignoring the $16$ most significant bits, which are unused. It then uses the CR3 address as the physical memory location of the L1 array, and uses the next $9$ most significant bits as the index to that L1 array, which will provide a PTE. It then checks that PTE to ensure it is present and has sufficient permissions to access, and uses the pointer inside the PTE as the physical memory location of the L2 table and uses the next $9$ most significant bits as the index to that L2 table. It repeats this process until a fault is produced or a data page is reached, where it finally uses the $12$ least significant bits as the offset to this data page address. It is worth noting that all PTEs in all of the L1, L2, L3, and L4 tables must be aligned to the size of a memory page, otherwise produce a fault.