Suppose we have a $n \times n$ matrix $A$. When there exists a scalar $\lambda \in R$ and a nonzero vector $x \in R^n$, such that $Ax = \lambda x$. In such a case $\lambda$ is known as the eigenvalue and $x$ is the corresponding eigenvector. We should note that while $x$ can not be zero in the case of an eigenvector, the corresponding eigenvalue $\lambda$ can be zero.

While it is possible for a rectangular $m \times n$ $A$ to also have vectors $x$ and scalars $\lambda$ such that $Ax = \lambda x$, these are not considered eigenvectors and eigenvalues.

Likewise, the reason we do not consider zero vectors $x$ to be eigenvectors is because, in the case that $A0 = \lambda 0$, we might note that $\lambda$ is undefined, or valid for all values, which does not tell us anything about the characteristics of the matrix.

It is relatively intuitive to derive an eigenvalue given the corresponding eigenvector, as we would simply multiply the matrix $A$ by eigenvector $x$ and calculate $\lambda = \frac{||Ax||}{||x||}$. It may not be initially as obvious as to how to find the eigenvector given the eigenvalues. We can start by noting again that in the case of an eigenvalue $\lambda$ and corresponding eigenvector $x$, $Ax = \lambda x$. Using basic algebra, it follows that $Ax - \lambda x = 0$. Since vectors are distributive with matrices and scalars, we can factor out $A - \lambda$ in the equation to get $(A - I_n\lambda)x= 0$. Hence the vectors $x$ whose eigenvalue is $\lambda$ are represented by the null space $Nul(A - I_n\lambda)$. This null space is known as the $\lambda$-eigenspace.

For example, using this recipe, we can solve for a $3\times 3$ matrix $A$'s eigenvectors given an eigenvalue $\lambda$ by solving the system of equations:
$$A = \pmatrix{a&b&c\\d&e&f\\g&h&i}$$
$$\pmatrix{a - \lambda&b&c\\d&e-\lambda&f\\g&h&i-\lambda}\pmatrix{x\\y\\z}=\pmatrix{0\\0\\0}$$Recall that a zero-vector cannot be an eigenvector, hence if an eigenspace is a $Nul(0)$, (i.e. the only vector in the null space is $0$, then there cannot possibly be an eigenvector within that specific $\lambda$-eigenspace, and hence $\lambda$ is not an eigenvalue of $A$.

Now we may notice that the $0$-eigenspace can be represented as $Nul(A - I_n 0)$. This null space is equal to $Nul(A)$. Now recall that for a square matrix $A$ that is the standard matrix of a one-to-one/onto linear transformation, the null space of $A$ must be trivial (i.e. $Nul(A) = \{0\})$. Now recall that such standard matrices are invertible. It follows that if $A$ is invertible, it has an empty $0$-eigenspace, i.e. $0$ is not an eigenvalue of $A$. Furthermore, for actual eigenvalues $\lambda$ of $A$, $A - \lambda I_n$ is never invertible.
# The Characteristic Polynomial
Now that we know how to derive eigenvectors from eigenvalues, we should find how to get eigenvalues with only the matrix we are analyzing. We do this using a characteristic polynomial. The characteristic polynomial of a $n \times n$ matrix $A$ is:$$f(\lambda) = det(A - \lambda I_n)$$
Roots of $f(\lambda)$, i.e. solutions of $\lambda$ wherein $f(\lambda) = 0$, are eigenvalues of the matrix $A$.
In practice, calculating this value using the determinant by hand becomes exponentially more cumbersome as the size $n$ of the matrix grows. Hence, we can also find this same characteristic polynomial via the trace of a square matrix. Firstly, a trace of matrix $A$, $Tr(A)$, is the sum of the diagonal entries of $A$. The characteristic polynomial can be calculated as:$$f(\lambda) = (-1)^n \lambda^n + (-1)^n Tr(A)+...+det(A)$$
## Rational Root Theorem
The rational root theorem states that for a $n \times n$ matrix $A$ whose characteristic polynomial has only integer coefficients, all rational roots of the characteristic polynomial are integer divisors of $det(A)$.

Do note that, while all rational roots of the characteristic polynomial are whole divisors of $det(A)$, it does not logically follow that you will find any roots via this method, as it is possible that all of the roots of the polynomial are NOT rational.